# [
        The moral status and rights of artificial intelligence
     — NYU Scholars](https://nyuscholars.nyu.edu/en/publications/the-moral-status-and-rights-of-artificial-intelligence)

The moral status and rights of artificial intelligence — NYU Scholars Skip to main navigation Skip to search Skip to main content NYU Scholars Home Help & FAQ Home Profiles Research units Research output Search by expertise, name or affiliation The moral status and rights of artificial intelligence S. Matthew Liao Global Public Health Research output: Chapter in Book/Report/Conference proceeding › Chapter Overview Fingerprint Abstract As AIs acquire greater capacities, the issue of whether AIs would acquire greater moral status becomes salient. This chapter sketches a theory of moral status and considers what kind of moral status an AI could have. Among other things, the chapter argues that AIs that are alive, conscious, or sentient, or those that can feel pain, have desires, and have rational or moral agency should have the same kind of moral status as entities that have the same kind of intrinsic properties. It also proposes that a sufficient condition for an AI to have human-level moral status and be a rightsholder is when an AI has the physical basis for moral agency. This chapter also considers what kind of rights a rightsholding AI could have and how AIs could have greater than human-level moral status. Original languageEnglish (US)Title of host publicationEthics of Artificial IntelligencePublisherOxford University PressPages480-503Number of pages24ISBN (Electronic)9780190905033DOIshttps://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190905033.003.0018 StatePublished - Jan 1 2020 KeywordsAI moral statusConsciousnessHuman-level moral statusMoral agencyRational agencyRightsholdersRobot rightsSentienceSuperintelligenceASJC Scopus subject areasGeneral Arts and Humanities Access to Document 10.1093/oso/9780190905033.003.0018 Other files and links Link to publication in ScopusLink to the citations in Scopus Fingerprint Dive into the research topics of 'The moral status and rights of artificial intelligence'. Together they form a unique fingerprint. Moral Rights Arts & Humanities 100% Moral Status Arts & Humanities 89% Artificial Intelligence Arts & Humanities 75% Moral Agency Arts & Humanities 42% Rational Agency Arts & Humanities 18% Intrinsic Properties Arts & Humanities 16% Pain Arts & Humanities 15% Salient Arts & Humanities 11% View full fingerprint Cite this APA Standard Harvard Vancouver Author BIBTEX RIS Liao, S. M. (2020). The moral status and rights of artificial intelligence. In Ethics of Artificial Intelligence (pp. 480-503). Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190905033.003.0018 The moral status and rights of artificial intelligence. / Liao, S. Matthew. Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. Oxford University Press, 2020. p. 480-503.Research output: Chapter in Book/Report/Conference proceeding › Chapter Liao, SM 2020, The moral status and rights of artificial intelligence. in Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. Oxford University Press, pp. 480-503. https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780190905033.003.0018 Liao SM. The moral status and rights of artificial intelligence. In Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. Oxford University Press. 2020. p. 480-503 doi: 10.1093/oso/9780190905033.003.0018 Liao, S. Matthew. / The moral status and rights of artificial intelligence. Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. Oxford University Press, 2020. pp. 480-503 @inbook{e026f2015a41427eba090cf431bcbdb2, title = "The moral status and rights of artificial intelligence", abstract = "As AIs acquire greater capacities, the issue of whether AIs would acquire greater moral status becomes salient. This chapter sketches a theory of moral status and considers what kind of moral status an AI could have. Among other things, the chapter argues that AIs that are alive, conscious, or sentient, or those that can feel pain, have desires, and have rational or moral agency should have the same kind of moral status as entities that have the same kind of intrinsic properties. It also proposes that a sufficient condition for an AI to have human-level moral status and be a rightsholder is when an AI has the physical basis for moral agency. This chapter also considers what kind of rights a rightsholding AI could have and how AIs could have greater than human-level moral status.", keywords = "AI moral status, Consciousness, Human-level moral status, Moral agency, Rational agency, Rightsholders, Robot rights, Sentience, Superintelligence", author = "Liao, {S. Matthew}", note = "Publisher Copyright: {\textcopyright} Oxford University Press 2020.", year = "2020", month = jan, day = "1", doi = "10.1093/oso/9780190905033.003.0018", language = "English (US)", pages = "480--503", booktitle = "Ethics of Artificial Intelligence", publisher = "Oxford University Press",} TY - CHAPT1 - The moral status and rights of artificial intelligenceAU - Liao, S. MatthewN1 - Publisher Copyright: © Oxford University Press 2020.PY - 2020/1/1Y1 - 2020/1/1N2 - As AIs acquire greater capacities, the issue of whether AIs would acquire greater moral status becomes salient. This chapter sketches a theory of moral status and considers what kind of moral status an AI could have. Among other things, the chapter argues that AIs that are alive, conscious, or sentient, or those that can feel pain, have desires, and have rational or moral agency should have the same kind of moral status as entities that have the same kind of intrinsic properties. It also proposes that a sufficient condition for an AI to have human-level moral status and be a rightsholder is when an AI has the physical basis for moral agency. This chapter also considers what kind of rights a rightsholding AI could have and how AIs could have greater than human-level moral status.AB - As AIs acquire greater capacities, the issue of whether AIs would acquire greater moral status becomes salient. This chapter sketches a theory of moral status and considers what kind of moral status an AI could have. Among other things, the chapter argues that AIs that are alive, conscious, or sentient, or those that can feel pain, have desires, and have rational or moral agency should have the same kind of moral status as entities that have the same kind of intrinsic properties. It also proposes that a sufficient condition for an AI to have human-level moral status and be a rightsholder is when an AI has the physical basis for moral agency. This chapter also considers what kind of rights a rightsholding AI could have and how AIs could have greater than human-level moral status.KW - AI moral statusKW - ConsciousnessKW - Human-level moral statusKW - Moral agencyKW - Rational agencyKW - RightsholdersKW - Robot rightsKW - SentienceKW - SuperintelligenceUR - http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?scp=85111885061&partnerID=8YFLogxKUR - http://www.scopus.com/inward/citedby.url?scp=85111885061&partnerID=8YFLogxKU2 - 10.1093/oso/9780190905033.003.0018DO - 10.1093/oso/9780190905033.003.0018M3 - ChapterAN - SCOPUS:85111885061SP - 480EP - 503BT - Ethics of Artificial IntelligencePB - Oxford University PressER - Powered by Pure, Scopus & Elsevier Fingerprint Engine™ All content on this site: Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the Creative Commons licensing terms apply We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies Log in to Pure About web accessibility Report vulnerability