# [Reddit - Dive into anything](https://www.reddit.com/r/singularity/comments/128hk8z/how_is_this_sprint_on_ai_going_to_impact/)

Reddit - Dive into anything Skip to main content Reddit and its partners use cookies and similar technologies to provide you with a better experience. By accepting all cookies, you agree to our use of cookies to deliver and maintain our services and site, improve the quality of Reddit, personalize Reddit content and advertising, and measure the effectiveness of advertising. By rejecting non-essential cookies, Reddit may still use certain cookies to ensure the proper functionality of our platform. For more information, please see our Cookie Notice and our Privacy Policy. Open menu Open navigation Go to Reddit Home r/singularity A chip A close button Get app Get the Reddit app Log In Log in to Reddit Expand user menu Open settings menu Log In / Sign Up Advertise on Reddit Shop Collectible Avatars Get the Reddit app Scan this QR code to download the app now Or check it out in the app stores Go to singularity r/singularity r/singularity Everything pertaining to the technological singularity and related topics, e.g. AI, human enhancement, etc. Members Online • [deleted] ADMIN MOD How is this sprint on AI going to impact religious communities? Discussion At the moment most people seem to be focused on how recent AI/LLM developments could affect their jobs and the economy. But there are huge numbers of people who believe in the existence of an invisible omnipotent being, in various flavours that there is zero verifiable evidence for, yet they take it extremely seriously. How are these myriad groups going to react to the imminent arrival of a super-intelligence that far surpasses our own, that they could actually reach out and touch, and that could meet many of the criteria of a new "God"? Are they going to switch allegiance en masse? Or will it make widespread religious tensions boil over into violence as they fight this upstart that threatens their worldview? Or could it perhaps usher in a new era where religious differences and tensions are forgotten about and we come together? Is this possibly going to be magnified by economic turbulence? Are there any precedents? I don't know, but it seems to me that a lot of people are going to be deeply affected. Does anyone have any insights? Read more Top 1% Rank by size Top Posts Reddit reReddit: Top posts of April 1, 2023 Reddit reReddit: Top posts of April 2023 Reddit reReddit: Top posts of 2023 &nbsp; TOPICS Gaming Valheim Genshin Impact Minecraft Pokimane Halo Infinite Call of Duty: Warzone Path of Exile Hollow Knight: Silksong Escape from Tarkov Watch Dogs: Legion Sports NFL NBA Megan Anderson Atlanta Hawks Los Angeles Lakers Boston Celtics Arsenal F.C. Philadelphia 76ers Premier League UFC Business GameStop Moderna Pfizer Johnson & Johnson AstraZeneca Walgreens Best Buy Novavax SpaceX Tesla Crypto Cardano Dogecoin Algorand Bitcoin Litecoin Basic Attention Token Bitcoin Cash Television The Real Housewives of Atlanta The Bachelor Sister Wives 90 Day Fiance Wife Swap The Amazing Race Australia Married at First Sight The Real Housewives of Dallas My 600-lb Life Last Week Tonight with John Oliver Celebrity Kim Kardashian Doja Cat Iggy Azalea Anya Taylor-Joy Jamie Lee Curtis Natalie Portman Henry Cavill Millie Bobby Brown Tom Hiddleston Keanu Reeves RESOURCES About Reddit Advertise Help Blog Careers Press Communities Best of Reddit Topics Impressum Content Policy Privacy Policy User Agreement Reddit, Inc. © 2024. All rights reserved.