# [AI and Accountability: Who is responsible for managing AI? — MIT Media Lab](https://www.media.mit.edu/articles/ai-and-accountability-who-is-responsible-for-managing-ai/)

AI and Accountability: Who is responsible for managing AI? — MIT Media Lab User Login Search Search Nav Nav Find People, Projects, etc. Search Email: Password: Work for a Member company and need a Member Portal account? Register here with your company email address. Work for a Member company and forgot your password? News + Updates Research About Support the Media Lab Graduate Program People Events Videos Member Portal Article AI and Accountability: Who is responsible for managing AI? via Emerson Collective Aug. 4, 2023 Topics #artificial intelligence #machine learning #ethics #technology #mental health People Rosalind W. Picard Professor of Media Arts and Sciences Projects Leveraging artificial intelligence for the assessment of severity of depressive symptoms Groups Media Lab Research Theme: Life with AI Media Lab Research Theme: Connected Mind + Body Share this article In the final episode of the limited series on AI from the Technically Optimistic podcast, we look at the big issues of accountability and responsibility. How should we allocate the responsibilities for managing this technology? Who will decide when AIs are doing more harm than good? Will we be looking to private companies or depending on public servants? And what will be left for individual citizens to decide?To help unlock solutions to the growing challenge of AI responsibility, host Raffi Krikorian speaks with Maria Ressa, Nobel Prize-winning journalist and co-founder of Rappler; scientist and inventor Rosalind Picard from MIT’s Media Lab; James Manyika, Senior Vice President of Research, Technology, and Society at Google; Kyunghyun Cho, Professor of Computer Science and Data Science at New York University; Stanford Internet Observatory Research Manager Renee DiResta; and Professor and data journalist Meredith Broussard. Together, they discuss different approaches to AI responsibility, and look at what the future could hold for ethical accountability. Read on Emerson Collective Related Content Article Research Scientist and Engineer Rosalind Picard Is Transforming Digital Health with Wearable AI Rosalind Picard’s unique technology is revolutionizing digital health. via Success Magazine · Jan. 12, 2024 in Affective Computing · Media Lab Research Theme: Life with AI · Media Lab Research Theme: Connected Mind + Body #artificial intelligence #health #wearable computing +1 more Video Videos Research Group Overview: Affective Computing Advancing human wellbeing by developing new ways to communicate, understand, and respond to emotion Oct. 18, 2023 in Affective Computing · Media Lab Research Theme: Life with AI · Media Lab Research Theme: Connected Mind + Body #robotics #design #social networks +55 more Publication Research Wearable Digital Health Technology Friend, Stephen H., Geoffrey S. Ginsburg, and Rosalind W. Picard. "Wearable Digital Health Technology." New England Journal of Medicine 389.22 (2023): 2100-2101. Academic Paper, Nov. 2023 in Affective Computing · Media Lab Research Theme: Connected Mind + Body #artificial intelligence #bioengineering #data Article Research Curiosity Stream: AI tipping point Media Lab Professor Rosalind Picard and other experts discuss the opportunities and risks posed by rapid advances in AI. via Curiosity Stream · Nov. 28, 2023 in Affective Computing · Media Lab Research Theme: Life with AI #artificial intelligence #social science #ethics News + Updates Research About Support the Media Lab Graduate Program People Events Videos Member Portal More ways to explore Videos Publications Job Opportunities Contact Massachusetts Institute of Technology School of Architecture + Planning Accessibility Donate to the Lab