# [Ethics in AI - The future responsibility of the artificial intelligence we create today](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/ethics-ai-future-responsibility-artificial-we-create-john-price)

Ethics in AI - The future responsibility of the artificial intelligence we create today LinkedIn and 3rd parties use essential and non-essential cookies to provide, secure, analyze and improve our Services, and to show you relevant ads (including professional and job ads) on and off LinkedIn. Learn more in our Cookie Policy.Select Accept to consent or Reject to decline non-essential cookies for this use. You can update your choices at any time in your settings. Accept Reject Agree & Join LinkedIn By clicking Continue, you agree to LinkedIn’s User Agreement, Privacy Policy, and Cookie Policy. Sign in to view more content Create your free account or sign in to continue your search Sign in Welcome back Email or phone Password Show Forgot password? Sign in or By clicking Continue, you agree to LinkedIn’s User Agreement, Privacy Policy, and Cookie Policy. New to LinkedIn? Join now or By clicking Continue, you agree to LinkedIn’s User Agreement, Privacy Policy, and Cookie Policy. New to LinkedIn? Join now Skip to main content LinkedIn Articles People Learning Jobs Join now Sign in Photo by Karolina Grabowska: bit.ly/454KiYX Ethics in AI - The future responsibility of the artificial intelligence we create today Report this article John Price John Price Growth focused data & analytics / business transformation leader. Published Sep 25, 2023 + Follow A brilliant and idealistic scientist with a fulfilling life and a wonderful childhood but bereft at the early loss of his mother, discovers the secret to creating life and sets out to create a noble race to elevate above and beyond humanity’s limitations. His ‘version 1.0’ creation however is a failure and he casts it aside, only to discover later that his creation has evolved, has learnt to read, write and speak eloquently, but has an inner rage that has led to death and violence amongst the mountain community it inhabits. His brother is murdered by the monster and his adopted sister wrongly executed for it as a result.The creature finally confronts its creator, and identifies that his rage is only because no human will love it in its current form. The creature demands that a companion is created to accompany him in this life. The creator was of course responsible for all of this in the first place, and any death and violence that has since occurred – was only because of him to start with. Therefore, it is the creator's responsibility to resolve this situation once and for all.This story was written in 1818 and of course describes the predicament of Mary Shelley’s Victor Frankenstein and his creation of life. It also perfectly depicts the issue of forward-looking responsibility in artificial intelligence as the world at scale comes to terms with generative AI and other forms of accessible artificial intelligence creations.Mary Shelley's Frankenstein highlights the importance of understanding forward-looking responsibility for new technologiesI recently completed a short-course certificate of Ethics in AI from Lund University and one of the most intriguing and critical ethical considerations in the age of AI is to come to terms with: “who is really responsible for what the AI does from here”?Consider the roles of the following:The CreatorThe person(s) who write the code and create a new technology may be directly responsible at inception, but often do so under the instruction, financing and/or coercion of some kind of sponsor. If the creator does not remain a participant after inception, to what extent can or should they be responsible for the future actions of a cognitively aware AI?This was the challenge for Victor Frankenstein, who, racked with guilt over the death of his brother and subsequent execution of his sister, bore the lone responsibility for the actions of the monster he had created.The UserLong after new technologies are released into the mainstream, users are then able to guide its actions. With contemporary technology, they are of course able to build upon core infrastructure as a platform, evolving these technologies into their own sub-creations.The issue of forward looking responsibility in AI is amplified here, as without the platform to operate from (thanks to the creator), the evolutions would not exist. If those sub-products of AI then go on to perform malicious tasks, is it the end-user who is ultimately responsible?The Investor / Executive SponsorAs with all major developments in technology, they are funded by larger organisations that may be academic, corporate or political in nature, which in turn implies that each has their own agenda. These organisations employ or commission new technology and product innovation to be developed on their behalf, and typically own most if not all of the IP and therefore direction of development and use cases. We see this time and again over hundreds of years where many great innovations and technologies we use started life as a military innovation, later released or commercialised after serving its original purpose in the war machine.So who is really responsible?Thinking of the above stakeholders (there are of course more), the ethical consideration in the creation of AI – especially as cognitive AI comes to life in coming years – is to understand who is accountable for the future actions of the intelligence, and to identify what if any safeguards are required to protect future users and the general public.Dating all the way back to Mary Shelley in the early 19th century, we’ve all read too many good books and watched too many good sci-fi movies not to understand the consequences of inaction or failure to address forward looking responsibility in AI. Like Comment Copy LinkedIn Facebook Twitter Share 10 2 Comments Becky Madden Marketing | Strategy | Mentor 5mo Report this comment This is great John Price. I wonder if it should be a prerequisite for anyone intending to deal with or create AI to do a course like this. There’s an interesting discussion on this in play with Kym Lam Sam as well. You two may be interested in connecting and sharing ideas. A great read, thank you. Like Reply 1 Reaction See more comments To view or add a comment, sign in More articles by this author No more previous content Business and leadership lessons from Five Star Chef Oct 3, 2023 Amazon launches palm scanning technology to augment digital identity in retail Sep 27, 2023 Quantum Computing investment in Financial Services predicted to reach AUD29 billion in the next decade Sep 20, 2023 3 key areas of improvement for AI Model review & regulation Sep 11, 2023 Five use cases for AI in Revenue Operations Aug 30, 2023 A growth leader's mindset: 5 key attributes = 2.4x performance Aug 7, 2023 Chat GPT-5 set to recognise and generate human speech Aug 2, 2023 Understanding the six key techniques for testing AI frameworks Aug 1, 2023 Can governments stay relevant to the pace of technology advancement? May 22, 2023 Team ownership of transformation improves outcomes by up to 67% Sep 28, 2021 No more next content See all Others also viewed Perspectives on Ethics in AI Sandeep S. 3y On AI, Ethics and the End of the Useful Internet BeeReal 3mo The Ethics of Artificial Intelligence Mohammad J Sear 9mo Artificial Intelligence Transparency and Accountability Mr. Ashley Moore 8mo "AI Ethics and Bias Mitigation" AAV Innovation Labs 2mo Global Forum on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence 2024 - Opening Speech Emilija Stojmenova Duh 1mo Aristotle’s Pen in Action: Creating Ethical AI Through Ancient Wisdom Adam M. Victor 3w AI Ethics in Software Dev: Navigating the Murky Waters Dean Bodart 4mo Ethical AI for Marketers Luz Marina Torres Forero 9mo Achieving a balance between innovation and ethics with the use of artificial intelligence Gops Pillay 9mo Show more Show less Explore topics Sales Marketing Business Administration HR Management Content Management Engineering Soft Skills See All LinkedIn © 2024 About Accessibility User Agreement Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Copyright Policy Brand Policy Guest Controls Community Guidelines العربية (Arabic) Čeština (Czech) Dansk (Danish) Deutsch (German) English (English) Español (Spanish) Français (French) हिंदी (Hindi) Bahasa Indonesia (Indonesian) Italiano (Italian) 日本語 (Japanese) 한국어 (Korean) Bahasa Malaysia (Malay) Nederlands (Dutch) Norsk (Norwegian) Polski (Polish) Português (Portuguese) Română (Romanian) Русский (Russian) Svenska (Swedish) ภาษาไทย (Thai) Tagalog (Tagalog) Türkçe (Turkish) Українська (Ukrainian) 简体中文 (Chinese (Simplified)) 正體中文 (Chinese (Traditional)) Language