# [Artificial intelligence and spirituality: The four domains of concern](https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/readersblog/herbinger/artificial-intelligence-and-spirituality-the-four-domains-of-concern-39318/)

Artificial intelligence and spirituality: The four domains of concern + READERS’ BLOG by logout Register/Login Register/Login readers’ blog readers’ blog BusinessIndiaEntertainmentEnvironmentEconomyLifestyleSportsPoliticsTech back to toi home logout TOI READERS’ BLOG BusinessIndiaEntertainmentEnvironmentEconomyLifestyleSportsPoliticsTech ••• News / Readers’ Blog / Tech / Artificial intelligence and spirituality: The four domains of concern Tech Artificial intelligence and spirituality: The four domains of concern Dr.KAMAL BHATTACHARYYA @HERBINGER Dec 01, 2021, 15:59 IST Artificial Intelligence is now selling like hot cake. Every university of the world is branding AI under their courses. The objective of AI is to replace human effort and work in precision that requires skills and tenacity, like medical operation or quick calculation and many more. AI is nothing but collection of data that are premeditatedly stored in sequence and prompted by command and does the work. It is nothing but systematic action and reaction but with limited boundary that means if the machine is not fitted with a particular responsive data the machine will fail to act. For example if a robot is fitted with data to response against good morning to good morning and good night to good night, and if it is not fitted with data of good evening, and if you say to it good evening, it will not reply anything. But now AI is working under manipulating data, and the artificial intelligence will select the data from the store and put them together by itself and be responsive. On the other hand spirituality is automated action and reaction and spontaneously takes its decision without harbouring any other support. Does it have any influence of AI on spirituality? Will AI be able to affect spirituality? Let us discus four major domains of concern and the distinctions and relations of AI and Spirituality. The cliché is that every invention has good and bad effects. AI might have more good effect on human being and society and less adverse effect and vice versa. The possibility of AI is abundant and acknowledged. Since AI will be used by human, so ethics are involved like all other applied sciences. There are cannons of ethics to follow. So to discuss this issue I will keep it under the area of human understanding and philosophy common for every religion. The first domain of concern is concentration, patience and attention. Surprisingly the common field of every spiritual philosophy is concentration. Every spiritual teaching teaches to be first concentrate be it Buddhist philosophy, Vedanta Philosophy, Jain Philosophy. AI by dint of its advanced technology is peeping in our privacy and attention. It is causing social dilemma in the society. The social media platforms are providing us services and without any cost, and surprisingly we the users become the product unwittingly in the hands of the companies. AI is harping on our attention. Every now and then our mobile phone sounds of some message, and we cannot control but to see the contents and these companies compel us to see the message or advertisement and earn money out of your attention. So here the AI is seeking our attention successfully and we are gradually being doll in the hands of technology. It is beautifully explained by Swami Sarvapriyananda in a lecture by United Nation that the Mobile phones, which are a product of AI, gradually making us addicted to them. It is like the gambling machine in Las Vegas to train our neuropsychology and production of dopamine and snatch your attention. This is truly insidious of this domain. So technologies are not neutrals, like guns are available with every adult individual in America but they are kept in gun cabinet so that they do get into the hands of the minors. The damage has been done in the mode of continuous partial attention. People’s attention has been intermittent and rest of the attention has been channelized on our phones and our attention is generating money for the MNC through advertisements. So we are the product. So technology will affect the spirituality and it will reduce the attention power surreptitiously. The second domain of concern is the selflessness. The attention deficit attitude of common people will not lead a life empathically. If one cannot pay attention to one’s neighbor the life will not be lived worth. Altruistic life will be rare in the society. AI will reduce the arena of the person who will be more engaged in him. Spirituality within general people will be less. Kathoponishad explains that we are unable to realize the truth because we are distracted with external affairs, our body, possession, love, sex, so technology will lead us further from the inner-realization to materialistic world. AI will compel us to be immersed in virtual world and cutoff from the external world. We will be less compassionate as to be compassionate we require attention. The third domain is devoutness or adherence whatever you may call. All theist and atheist practitioners follow one thing in common which is sacrifice, love and devoutness to somebody who is greater than us. Our demands are flowing in different directions and devotion means to collectively sacrifice all these demands to somebody or some entity referred as God, or any other names. The profit making technology in the form of AI will be a substantial helping hand to fulfill the little desires of human being and reduce the possibility of faith and devotion. Finally the area which is also an area of concern is the knowledge of discovering and analyzing ourselves. The Vedanta, the human spirituality and AI both analyze our demands, but both do it differently. Spiritually, as Vedanta says, we are neither body nor soul but an accumulated energy of light transcends from the higher self. On the other hand AI analyzes our thought pattern, speech pattern and behavior pattern and builds enormous database and analyses using algorithm and micromanaged the human desire. But AI will not be able to find anything higher or greater transcendent beyond this. Therefore there is vast difference between spirituality and AI, and bases are different. AI based on materialistic consciousness which can be controlled and manipulated. Spirituality is not materialistic feeling but transcendent and it is indivisible. rashmi bajaj sheer plagiarism,original ideas--swami sarvapriyanand\'s video ! Reply Manoj Das i find the ideas expressed here are not original but picked up from swami sarvapriyananda\'s 17-minute video talk in its entirety (without even acknow... Reply START A CONVERSATION Read Post a comment All Comments () + Characters Remaining: 3000 Share on Facebook Share on Twitter + Sort By: Up Voted Newest Oldest Discussed Down Voted Be the first one to review. Add Comment Globally active China Dr.KAMAL BHATTACHARYYA @HERBINGER The only means of salvation is proactive knowledge. The incredible thing about knowledge is that the more you will donate, the more it will grow. more Chandrayan-3: Where fantasy comes alive Roorkee: The host of world premier institute, treated with basal attitude Death postponed as the bullet shot in revenge took twenty years to hit and kill Revoking mandatory PhD by UGC at the entry level: An observation Examination for evaluation: to be or not to be MOST read 8 Simple Steps to Protect the Environment Sabyasachi Mondal March 21, 2023 Story of an Eagle Vishu July 27, 2020 The Role Of Technology In The Future And Its Impact On Society Toshan Watts April 14, 2023 Recently Joined Bloggers Suchismita Debnath Adyasha Behera aaaa bbbb Aditi Vipul Sharma Aishwarya Abhishek Singh Arshiya Mahajan gitityagi Iswar Chatterjee msendhilkumarss disclaimer Any opinions and views expressed on or through the above content/blogs are those of the designated authors/bloggers and do not necessarily represent views of Times Internet Limited ("Company"). Further, the Company does not make any warranty as to the correctness or reliability of such content. Follow us on facebook twitter rss feed youtube download toi app android iphone ipad About us Create Your Own Ad Terms of Use and Grievance Redressal Policy Privacy policy Advertise with us RSS Newsletter Feedback ePaper Sitemap Archives Copyright © 2024 Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. All rights reserved. For reprint rights: Times Syndication Service